We’re going to walk through a complete, rigorous design for your JetBrains intern challenge — the stem agent. I’ll give you the thought process, the architecture, a technical manual with module‑by‑module detail, the evaluation plan, and notes on what will surprise you, what might fail, and what you’d do next. This isn’t full source code yet; it’s the blueprint you’ll code from, and if you follow it you’ll have a submission that feels like it came from a senior engineer who really thought about the problem.

1. What We’re Actually Building
A stem cell reads environmental signals and differentiates into a specialised cell. The stem agent should do the same: start with a minimal, generic kernel that can “sense” a class of tasks and then autonomously evolve the right architecture, toolset, and behaviour to solve them. It’s not a universal agent — it’s an agent that becomes specific through its own process.

Our job is to make this tangible and measurable, not magic.

2. The Task Domain: Deep Research
Why Deep Research?

It’s a well‑defined (but hard) task class with clear inputs (a question/topic) and clear outputs (a report with citations).

There are known, hand‑built agents (e.g., GPT‑Researcher, AutoGPT research mode) that give us a baseline to beat.

It requires a rich set of tools (web search, scraping, PDF reading, code execution for data analysis) and a non‑trivial planning strategy – perfect for showing that a stem agent can fi gure out which tools matter and how to combine them.

Evaluation can be automated using an LLM‑as‑judge with a rubric, yet we can also measure down‑stream factuality (citations match sources).

So our stem agent’s job: given the class “perform deep research on a topic and produce a comprehensive, cited report”, evolve a specialised agent that does it better than a hand‑crafted baseline.

3. Core Metaphor in Software
We translate the stem‑cell metaphor into a meta‑optimisation loop:

Stem agent kernel: an orchestrator that runs an evolutionary loop. It doesn’t do research itself; it designs children.

Environment signals: performance metrics (completeness, factuality, efficiency) on a held‑out set of research tasks.

Differentiation: generating and modifying agent specifications (the “DNA”) until one becomes a high‑performing specialist.

Safeguards: versioning, rollback, and always testing a new spec in a sandbox before replacing the “production” spec.

The stem agent never edits its own running code. It produces artefacts (spec files) that are loaded by a runtime harness. That harness is the specialised agent. This keeps the system safe and debuggable.

4. Detailed Architecture
text
┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                   Stem Agent (Orchestrator)        │
│  - manages population of specs                    │
│  - runs evolution loop (evaluate → select → vary) │
│  - logs everything, stores best spec              │
└──────────┬─────────────┬──────────────┬───────────┘
           │             │              │
     ┌─────▼─────┐ ┌────▼─────┐ ┌──────▼──────┐
     │ Evaluator │ │Evolution │ │ Spec Store  │
     │ (on val)  │ │Operators │ │ (versioned) │
     └─────┬─────┘ └────┬─────┘ └─────────────┘
           │            │
     ┌─────▼─────┐      │
     │Agent       │      │
     │Runtime    │      │
     │(instantiates spec)│
     └───────────┘      │
                        │
                 ┌──────▼──────┐
                 │  LLM Judge  │
                 │ (metric)    │
                 └─────────────┘
4.1 Agent Specification (the DNA)
A JSON structure that completely defines a deep‑research agent. Example:

json
{
  "id": "spec_v3",
  "system_prompt": "You are a meticulous research assistant...",
  "tools": ["web_search", "scrape_page", "python_repl"],
  "planning_strategy": "plan_and_solve",     // or "react", "tree_of_thought", etc.
  "memory": {
    "type": "scratchpad",
    "max_steps": 20,
    "summary_prompt": "..."
  },
  "stop_condition": {
    "min_report_length": 500,
    "must_include_citations": true,
    "max_steps": 25
  },
  "output_schema": "markdown_report_with_citations"
}
Everything that influences how the agent thinks, acts, and terminates is in this spec. The stem agent only needs to read and write this JSON.

4.2 The Runtime Harness
A piece of infrastructure that takes a spec and a research task, and returns the agent’s output + trace. We keep it simple: a Python class ResearchAgent that builds a LangChain/LlamaIndex agent (or a raw OpenAI function‑calling loop) from the spec, runs it, and stops when the stop condition is met. This harness is fixed and never modified by evolution – only the spec changes.

4.3 Tool Library
A catalogue of tools with descriptions and function schemas, e.g.:

web_search(query: str) -> List[SearchResult]

scrape_page(url: str) -> str (extracts main text)

python_repl(code: str) -> str (executes Python in a sandbox)

read_pdf(url: str) -> str

The stem agent can select a subset for each spec. The tool descriptions are available to the LLM when it mutates specs.

4.4 Evaluation Metric (the “environment signal”)
We need an automated metric that correlates with research quality. Use LLM‑as‑judge with a detailed rubric (inspired by G‑Eval or DeepEval):

Completeness (1‑5): Did the report cover all key aspects?

Accuracy (1‑5): Are the claims factually correct?

Citation quality (1‑5): Are claims backed by trustworthy sources? Are citations present?

Coherence (1‑5): Is the report well‑structured?

We can also add a hard factuality check: extract each claim‑citation pair, verify the source contains supporting text (using an LLM comparator). The final score is a weighted average.

To make it reliable, we calibrate the judge on a small set of hand‑graded examples.

4.5 The Evolution Loop (Where the Stem Agent “Thinks”)
The loop runs for a budget of iterations (e.g., 30 generations) or until convergence:

text
1. Initialise population P with 5 diverse seeds (LLM‑generated)
2. For generation in 1..MAX_GEN:
   a. Evaluate every spec in P on the validation set of tasks
      (run runtime, compute metric)
   b. Record best-ever spec (safety checkpoint)
   c. If best score hasn't improved for PATIENCE generations, STOP
   d. Select top-k (e.g., 3) as parents
   e. For each parent, generate 2 children via:
        - LLM‑based **crossover/mutation**: the stem agent analyses the
          parent’s weak‑points (using detailed error traces from evaluator)
          and proposes an improved spec.
        - Random mutation: small prompt tweaks (temperature 1.0).
   f. Validate children (JSON parsing, tool existence, prompt length)
   g. P = parents ∪ children (keep population size manageable)
   h. Optionally, run a quick “regression test” on a tiny hold‑out set
      to ensure no catastrophic forgetting.
The LLM‑based mutation is the key thinking step. We give the stem agent a prompt like:

“You are a stem agent optimising a research agent. Here is the current best spec, its evaluation scores (+ sub‑scores for each task), and its error log (e.g., ‘failed to cite sources’, ‘report was too short’). Propose a new spec that addresses these weaknesses. You may add/remove tools, change the planning strategy, alter the system prompt, or adjust stop conditions. Return valid JSON.”

The stem agent then outputs a new spec. We parse and add it to the population.

4.6 Safety and “Rebuilding Without Breaking”
All specs are versioned and stored as JSON files in a directory (e.g., specs/v001.json).

The evaluation harness is completely stateless per trial.

Before a new spec is deemed “best”, we run it on a small regression set of previously solved tasks to make sure it hasn’t lost fundamental capabilities (e.g., it still cites sources).

If a child spec crashes or returns invalid outputs, it is simply discarded.

The stem agent itself is a simple Python script – no self‑modifying code, only data.

5. Technical Implementation Manual (How to Code It)
5.1 Project Structure
text
stem_agent/
├── main.py                  # entry point: run "python main.py --task_class research"
├── config.yaml              # API keys, hyperparams, paths
├── stem_agent.py            # orchestrator class
├── spec.py                  # AgentSpec dataclass + serialisation
├── runtime/
│   ├── agent_runtime.py     # builds agent from spec, runs task
│   ├── tool_belt.py         # tool definitions + execution sandbox
│   └── stop_condition.py   # evaluates spec.stop_condition
├── evaluator/
│   ├── judge.py             # LLM‑as‑judge rubric scoring
│   └── factuality.py        # claim‑citation verification
├── evolution/
│   ├── operators.py         # selection, LLM mutation, random mutation
│   └── population.py        # manages list of specs, history
├── tasks/
│   ├── train.jsonl          # validation tasks (question, golden_report optional)
│   └── test.jsonl           # held‑out test set
├── specs/                   # output directory for evolved specs
└── logs/                    # traces, scores
5.2 Key Module Details
spec.py
A dataclass that mirrors the JSON schema. Has methods:

from_dict(d) / to_dict() – serialise/deserialise.

validate() – checks that tool names exist, stop conditions are well‑formed.

agent_runtime.py
python
class ResearchRunner:
    def __init__(self, spec: AgentSpec, tools: ToolBelt):
        self.spec = spec
        self.tools = tools

    async def run(self, task: str) -> AgentOutput:
        # Build LLM agent according to spec.planning_strategy
        # loop:
        #   get next action from LLM (with system prompt = spec.system_prompt)
        #   if action is a tool call -> execute with tools
        #   if action is final answer -> apply stop_condition, return
        #   update scratchpad memory
        ...
This module uses the OpenAI API (function‑calling mode) and handles retries/error recovery. Because the spec is just configuration, the same code can create completely different research flows.

tool_belt.py
Define each tool as a function and register with a name, description, and schema. E.g.:

python
TOOLBOX = {
    "web_search": Tool(
        fn=search_web,
        description="Search the web and get snippets...",
        schema={...}
    ),
    ...
}
The agent spec references these keys, so the runtime dynamically selects the subset.

judge.py
Calls an LLM (e.g., gpt‑4o) with a prompt that contains the rubric, the research question, and the agent’s output. Returns a dict of scores. We average across multiple trials to reduce variance.

factuality.py
For each (claim, source_url) pair extracted from the report, scrape the source (or use a cached snippet) and ask a smaller LLM: “Does the source support this claim? yes/no”. Compute factuality ratio.

evolution/operators.py
python
def llm_mutation(spec: AgentSpec, error_summary: str, tool_descriptions: str) -> AgentSpec:
    prompt = f"""..."""
    new_spec_json = call_llm(prompt, response_format="json")
    return AgentSpec.from_dict(new_spec_json)
The error_summary is created by the evaluator: it collects per‑task failure patterns (e.g., “in 3/5 tasks, the agent never opened a source page, only used snippets”).

stem_agent.py (the orchestrator)
This is the main loop described in §4.5. It reads config, loads tools, loads task datasets, initialises the population, and runs generations. At the end it saves the best spec and prints a comparison report.

5.3 Setup & Run Instructions
pip install -r requirements.txt (openai, langchain, beautifulsoup4, duckduckgo-search, etc.)

Set OPENAI_API_KEY (use the key from Denis).

Optionally, prepare a few training tasks (10–20) in tasks/train.jsonl. If you don’t have gold reports, the judge can still score output without a reference (using the rubric).

Run python main.py. The script will:

Seed the population by asking the LLM to propose 5 initial specs.

Run evolution for 30 generations (configurable).

Print the best spec and its average score.

Run the baseline for comparison and show before/after metrics.

6. Evaluation: Before/After Comparison
Baseline (hand‑built)
We create a reasonable manual spec – the kind a developer would write after reading a few papers. For example:

System prompt: “You are a research agent. Use tools to gather information and write a report with citations.”

Tools: web_search, scrape_page.

Planning: ReAct.

Stop: after 15 steps or when final_answer called.

We evaluate this spec on the test set (unseen tasks) and record its score.

Stem‑evolved Agent
After evolution stops, we take the best‑scoring spec on validation and run it on the same test set. We compare:

Average rubric score.

Factuality ratio.

Average number of tool calls (efficiency).

Qualitative examples (maybe show a snippet where the evolved agent cites sources while the baseline does not).

Ideally we see a clear jump in citation quality and factual accuracy because the stem agent will have discovered that opening sources is critical – something the hand‑built prompt may not stress enough.

7. The Thought Process Behind the Design
Why an evolutionary loop instead of RL or gradient‑based optimisation?

Prompt and tool configuration spaces are discrete, high‑level, and poorly conditioned. LLM‑based mutation operators exploit the LLM’s own world knowledge about what makes a good research agent – they already “know” that citations matter. So two or three iterations may already beat hand‑crafted baselines.

We get interpretable specs and traceable progress.

It’s safe and easy to implement within an internship project timeframe.

Why didn’t I make the stem agent edit its own Python code?
Because that’s a recipe for disaster. By keeping the execution environment fixed and only evolving a declarative spec, we avoid the “self‑modification breaks everything” problem. The spec is the “phenotype”; the runtime is the unchanging “body”.

How does the stem agent “know” when to stop?
We use a plateau detection on the validation metric, plus a lower bound threshold (e.g., score > 0.8). This is the “good enough” signal. Optionally we measure the performance/cost trade‑off so we don’t build a spec that uses 50 tool calls for a tiny gain.

What will surprise you?

The LLM judge can be noisy – you have to tune its prompt and possibly calibrate it. Without calibration, the stem agent might optimise for “pleasing the judge” rather than true quality. To counter this, we include that hard factuality check.

Many mutated specs will be invalid JSON. You need a robust parsing/retry loop.

The initial seeds are often already decent, so you must define the baseline before seeing them; else comparison is unfair. We’ll fix the baseline spec in code, completely independent of the evolution.

What might fail?

Overfitting to the validation tasks: the stem agent could produce a spec that memorises answers (if the LLM judge is too lenient). Mitigation: tasks should be diverse, and we use an unseen test set.

Tool instability: web search APIs can fail, pages can be down. The runtime must handle failures gracefully and the evaluator must not penalise transient errors.

Cost: evolving on many tasks with many steps can burn API credits. We limit the population size and number of generations, and use a cheap model for mutation (gpt‑3.5‑turbo) while using gpt‑4 for final evaluation.

What I’d do with more time:

Implement a tool creation loop: the stem agent could write custom Python functions (e.g., a specific PDF parser) as part of the spec, then test them.

Use a DSPy‑style optimisation for the prompt parts: automatically generate few‑shot examples and instructions for sub‑prompts using a teleprompter. This would make the prompt tuning more systematic.

Introduce a regression‑avoidance mechanism like a Pareto front of specs that trade off performance and cost, so we can later choose a cheap but effective agent.

Build a simple UI to watch the evolution and compare spec outputs side‑by‑side.

8. Final Words for Your Submission
The evaluators will read your write‑up first, so make it tell a story:

Start with the stem‑cell metaphor and how you mapped it to an evolutionary meta‑agent.

Justify the domain (Deep Research) and why it’s a good testbed.

Explain the architecture exactly as I’ve laid out, with a diagram.

Show the before/after numbers and a qualitative example that makes the improvement obvious.

Be brutally honest about what failed – maybe a generation produced an agent that hallucinated citations, and how you fixed the factuality metric. That honesty shows maturity.

With this blueprint, you’ll have a system that is genuinely novel, safely engineered, and thoroughly evaluated. When they read your write‑up, they’ll see a candidate who thinks like a systems builder and a researcher.

Now you have everything you need. Time to code it – good luck.

Stack‑based failure prioritization (failure_stack)
Instead of a flat priority list, the mutation operator now uses an explicit stack (zásobník).

The evaluator pushes detected failures onto the stack ordered by criticality (1 = crash, 2 = factuality below floor, 3 = incomplete output, 4 = missing citations, 5 = poor style).

The mutation operator pops the top issue and generates a targeted fix, ensuring the most critical problem is always handled first.

Add a data structure: list (Python list as stack) in evolution/operators.py.

Emergency Override as a pre‑filter
Before running the full evaluation, each spec passes a hard‑coded gate (emergency_override function):

If the spec produces a runtime exception, it returns score 0 and is discarded immediately.

If the factuality ratio falls below 0.4, the spec is killed without considering other metrics.
This is the “Environment” signal translated into code. It should be called right after the runtime harness returns, inside the evaluation loop.

Organ‑priority seeding bias
When the initial population is generated, the LLM prompts can include an explicit instruction to prioritize basic function over flair, mirroring the “Heart → Map → Brain → Decorations” order. For example, tell the seeding LLM: “Start with a minimal, crash‑free agent, then add sophistication later.” This reduces junk seeds.

Named signal identifiers in the evaluation trace
Use the biological names (Environment, Brain, Neighbours) directly in the eval trace dict to make logs readable:

python
signal_trace = {
    "environment_score": overall_metric,
    "brain_signal": plateau_flag,
    "neighbour_signal": population_rank
}
This helps when debugging and when the mutation LLM reads the error summary.

Explicit “Tissues → Organs → Systems” logging
During evolution, log each spec’s “tissue” scores (individual tool success, prompt coherence) before compositing into the organ score. This gives you a richer error trace for the mutation prompt.